Privacy in the Age of AI: Navigating the Ethical Dimensions of Machine Learning:


The rapid advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) have created a new age of innovation and transformation in many industries. From business, education, entertainment, and Health care. AI has created major improvements in all these industries. Changing the way, we work and live our lives. The cost of this is a reduction in the overall privacy of people's lives.

AI and machine learning models sort through, test and train on numerous sets of data to improve performance. With the use of such data, there is often a high possibility of AI training and testing personal data. Information including behavioural patterns and sensitive data about family. Implications that arise from this include unwanted solicitations such as targeted advertising or corporate manipulation. Another challenge caused by AI is algorithmic bias. By introducing personal data and behavioural patterns, biases can be made present in the data that can lead to discriminatory outcomes that violate the principles of fairness and privacy.

The more that AI is used every day in various domains the higher the potential for security risks such as data leaks and manipulation of the AI. The foremost concern lay in the high probability of manipulation of unsupervised AI learning models, allowing for discrepancies in data to be introduced, creating undesirable outcomes in critical systems like self-driving. Manipulation of an autonomous car can make it unable to understand data inputs properly, such example includes not being able to correctly respond to traffic and surroundings. Additionally, data breaches from AI models pose a huge problem in terms of personal privacy. As self-driving cars get lots of access to personal data like addresses and behavioural patterns. Allowing people to be exposed to a plethora of problems including identity theft and financial fraud. To safeguard against potential negative outcomes, it is imperative to establish and enact a range of cybersecurity protocols that effectively shield both the user's confidential data and the AI models from harm. Such measures can include but are not limited to firewalls, encryption, multifactor authentication, and regular software updates. By implementing these safeguards, one can rest assured that their information and AI technologies are being protected with the utmost care and attention so that the user can be protected, and that technological innovation is allowed to happen.

In modern times it has become more common for surveillance systems such as facial recognition and behavioural pattern recognisers, to be aided using AI to monitor real-time actions and data. While these systems can and do come with benefits in terms of public safety. They significantly up the risk of personal privacy breaches, as constant monitoring can give massive amounts of data to companies and governments. This can lead to impediments to personal freedoms and rights if the data is exploited by malicious actors in a corporate company or government with the intent to manipulate the user or person. As in many social media companies they employ AI-run algorithms that learn the behavioural patterns of the user to know what ads to show. This tactic exploits the user's data to learn how to manipulate them to buy a product or service. This tracking can also observe personal biases and use that manipulate their subjective ideas by only showing relevant posts related to said subject. To prevent this misuse of data by surveillance and tracking, companies and governments walk a fine line when trying to use AI-driven algorithms so as to not manipulate the person's ideas while still allowing for innovation.

In conclusion, while AI has and is currently revolutionising various parts of our lives, it is important to consider the privacy risks and implications that come with its implementation. As we continue to integrate AI into our daily lives, it is essential to strike a balance between innovation and privacy to ensure that technology serves people's needs without compromising their rights and privacy.
